landon has always had his issues
mentally he's someone that is not as
open about it
i share everything with you guys
and i've always been very open
about my struggles with depression and
anxiety
and that's just me i get a lot of
comfort in talking to you guys about
those kinds of things
landon is a very quiet
secretive person and he has had
mental health issues for as long as i
have known him
he suffered from anxiety and depression
he has adhd which he has had since he
was a little boy
so his whole life he's always just kind
of struggled
with his emotions and just the way
his brain was wired around the time that
i got pregnant with delilah he
kind of started falling into a
depression
i don't think the two are correlated
whatsoever
we tried for delilah she wasn't an
accident
and we both came to the mutual decision
that we wanted another baby
at that time but there was other things
going on
with our lives that we didn't really
talk about
many factors just kind of contributed to
the fact that
his mental health just wasn't really
great at the time
so he went to see a psychiatrist
it's not his first time visiting a
psychiatrist when he was younger
all throughout elementary school and
middle school he took adhd medication
he stopped taking it in high school he
just didn't really like the way
it felt but he was starting school
online so he wanted to get back on that
and then he also decided that it would
be a good idea
to start on antidepressants and
maybe something to help with his anxiety
so he went
to the psychiatrist and kind of
explained his issues
he was having you know i'm having panic
attacks
i'm depressed and i have trouble
focusing
so his doctor prescribed him adhd
medication
antidepressants and an anti-anxiety
he did the right thing you know when
you're going through something
everyone tells you like find help go
seek help
his intentions were so pure he just
wanted help he just wanted to get better
and he just got worse the anti-anxiety
medication
that was prescribed to him was
for when he was having a panic attack it
wasn't something he took daily
he was only supposed to take it when
there was no other way for him to calm
down
in the middle of panic attack but they
were highly addictive
and then at the same time the adhd
medication was kind of addictive
because you take it and you have all
this energy to do all the things you
need to do in your day
so he'd take it and he'd clean the house
and he'd be kind of manic
and when he was distracted with all
these little things that he was now able
to focus on
it kind of took away from his anxious
and depressing thoughts so he got into
this pattern
of waking up in the morning and taking
his adhd medication to wake him up and
he felt awake
and ready for the day and he got a ton
of stuff done during the day
and felt really good and happy and
productive but another thing
about adhd medication is it can kind of
have some
side effects when it starts to wear off
and
you know you kind of come down from that
high and
you're just kind of depressed and sad
and
kind of the opposite you have no
motivation and it just kind of really
hits you hard
when your medicine wears off but then he
had his anti-anxiety medication so i was
like okay well
i'm not feeling great let me take this
medicine
to kind of calm myself down and it makes
you sleepy and drowsy
so he'd take that to relax and be able
to get to sleep
because another thing that the adhd
medication affected was being able to
sleep it makes you awake and it stays in
your system for a while so when you do
finally lay down to get to bed
you're physically exhausted your body is
really tired from everything you did
that day
but your brain is still going really
fast
so it was kind of a lethal mixture of
these two
very strong heavy drugs both very
addicting
and he just kind of fell into a hole
he needed the uppers to get up in the
morning and the downers
to slow down at night and the more
downers he took at night the more uppers
he needed to wake himself up
and the more uppers he took during the
day the more downers he needed to go to
bed
i thought you know the doctor gave that
to him
like it can't hurt why would a doctor
prescribe that if
it was bad for him and he's dead
that story ends with the young man's
death
link in the description to the full
video if you haven't seen already
as many many millions of views what's
the moral
to the story do you want to draw a
conclusion about the effects
of the drugs themselves do you want to
draw a conclusion
about the young woman's statement there
at the end
as i've edited that five minute excerpt
from the video
she wanted to draw a conclusion about
the trust she put in doctors
her unquestioning deference
to authority i want to draw a question
about
the way we live with knowledge and
uncertainty
in the 21st century a friend
of a friend recently was prescribed
antidepressants
and i was asked to do a little bit of
research
on the particular antidepressants
involved and then i ended up in a
conversation
with a friend of a friend of a friend
someone is really not my friend at all
who was insisting that
this drug that a doctor had recommended
on the basis of just a few minutes in an
interview
very brief face-to-face conversation
that this drug
was precisely the cure
for all of the problems that this friend
of a friend was having
so the way the reasoning works is this
um she's having trouble sleeping
so therefore this drug will help her
sleep she's lost a lot of weight
gain weight because it's what the doctor
ordered this wasn't a discussion about
side effects
this wasn't a discussion about the
percentile rate
of effectiveness of the placebo effect
you know natural rate of recovery versus
no
the problem was that everything
he was imagining the drug would do was
not even claimed
in the documentation for the drug
produced by the drug manufacturer
themselves right so i was in a position
of saying
you're imagining and ascribing to this
drug
what you want it to do you're engaged in
wishful thinking
right but this isn't in any way based on
the promise
of what this actual drug is even
supposed to not even the manufacturer
claims that this drug will do what you
want to do
we have a whole kind of pseudoscience
of labeling drugs as antidepressants
labeling drugs as antipsychotics etc
that is not based on the chemical
effects of those drugs and you know
to some extent as with criticizing
religion
like the critique of the religious
leaders only goes so far
and at some point you have to turn and
look at the followers
and say well aren't you people
responsible
for your own decisions in life when i
was reading
the information provided by the
manufacturer so this is not a critique
this is the manufacturer's own
information you know it it admitted
things in passing about this particular
antidepressant it admitted that there
were three different studies
that found that the drug had no benefit
at all
when compared to placebo now of course
they were more interested in telling you
about the other studies that did find
some benefit no matter how minor you
know
that was measured and there is this big
overarching problem with publication
bias
that in general studies that find an
effect
other than what the manufacturer is
looking for will not be published will
not be
promoted or may even be in sealed
data in uh findings that are presented
to the food and drug administration but
are kept secret
from the general pope this is a problem
in the american system of how drugs are
tested how drugs are evaluated
and partly um the american public says
fair enough because the actual research
is being paid for by the drug companies
who want to market the drug
so they do ten different tests and
nine of them show no positive effect
from the drug but one does
they have the right to just you know
publish and promote that
research but i mean there was an
especially telling
little paragraph in this advisory
from the manufacturer it seemed to me
from the way it was written that some
pages were intended for the patient and
some for the doctor
don't know exactly what the deal is with
how these things are circulated i i just
got as a pdf
directly off the internet so perhaps
these were instructions for doctors to
talk these things through
there was this one very telling
paragraph where it said
well you know there are a lot of
confounding factors
with this kind of research uh to
establish whether or not
you know what drug is effective so you
know
can you really expect the effect of the
drug to stand out
to be measurable to show up empirically
um
compared to all these confounding
factors i'm sitting there reading this
and i can't help thinking
you know if you have a headache
the effect of aspirin is very
very subtle on two different days
on one day if you have a headache you
take aspirin and you lie down
and then you feel better 30 minutes
later you may attribute that effect to
the aspirin and on another day
you have very similar headache and you
decide to just lie down and wait 30
minutes
without taking the aspirin you may also
find that you feel better
right so in your own life if you just
reflect
on the effects of something like aspirin
and how difficult it might be
to really empirically etiologically pin
down
exactly how effective is aspirations
interesting challenge
but these drugs we're talking about
multi-billion dollar marketing success
story
they are in the position of saying that
they they can't even
prove how efficacious they are their
positive effects
remain more dubious more difficult to
prove than the
very subtle medical benefit of something
like aspirin
in treating headaches so
wishful thinking it's dangerous it's
more dangerous than people
could possibly imagine you can tell
yourself
a very simple story a very reassuring
lie
like oh if the doctor recommended this
for me
it can't possibly harm me you can tell
yourself a lie that oh well
this is my problem and this is what the
doctor recommended
therefore the effects of this drug must
be the opposite of my problem they must
counteract my symptoms they must have an
effect that's
very much you know corresponding to what
i explained to the doctor
my problem was no if you go when you
read
the label if you read the warning for
the manufacturer in this case
the expectation was that the drug would
provide a calming effect
resulting in more sleep and the label is
warning you that side effects include
mania right now the critique of the
drug particular antidepressants case not
on the label
is that the reason why it causes mania
in some patients is that part of its
effect is of a
a stimulant effect not so different from
uh
methamphetamines and that then the
withdrawal when you quit the drug
also has these very negative effects in
some ways comparable to methamphetamine
antidepressants are very different from
methamphetamines but this is you know an
attempt of a medical doctor to talk
through
what the what the disadvantages of of
taking the drug
are um you know
there's an alternative there's an
alternative
to believing what people tell you and
there's an alternative to in this way
engaging in
wishful thinking and making up stories
yourself
you know it seems to be the hardest
thing
for people to really admit to themselves
i don't know you know and if you're
sitting there
you know looking at that drug in a
bottle if you've been handed a
prescription by a doctor
and you know again that may be on the
basis of doctor having a
five-minute conversation or a two-minute
conversation i have a story i guess i
won't say who this is but whatever i
have a story from a friend
um who threw a tantrum in a doctor's
office
because some test results for a
physically real condition came back and
didn't show anything more or the other
and the doctor without discussing it at
all just you know
some friend of mine freaked out like oh
well
you know i didn't get the the
testosterone don't tell me anything with
it
and the doctor uh without any discussion
just took out a prescription pad and
wrote you know prozac
wrote a depressive prescription
no no discussion of what your problem is
what the solution is what's that what
your problem no
like like oh yeah here's your
consolation prize sorry your symptoms
these things are prescribed they are
handed out with no you know with no firm
basis without without
diagnostic criteria um but whatever the
story however it is you've arrived at
this
you know situation where you're sitting
there with this prescription your hand
or with the
drug in your hand it seems to me that
you have to start
with the humbling realization i don't
know
and the wonderful thing in the 21st
century is
you don't even need to go to a library
to find out
there's a lot of research there are a
lot of hard facts that are presented
even by the manufacturers of these drugs
themselves even by
the food and drug administration you
know by the american government
probably whatever country you're in uh
but the government
you really can know you know and then
whatever decision you make you know you
just count the number of hours
like maybe maybe it's going to be six
hours
you put into researching this drug
before you feel you know
you got to recognize your medical doctor
didn't have six hours
your medical doctor didn't have six
hours to look into this
and think about how many drugs he deals
with in his profession
and how many different patients it's not
an excuse
but the fact of the matter is the doctor
can't look into
every drug in his life for six hours but
you can look into every drug in your
life
for six hours for 12 hours for whatever
it takes
you can take responsibility you know for
your own health
uh to that extent and
as i say all of that begins
with having the humility to admit to
yourself that you just don't know
and maybe feeling scared maybe feeling
afraid
and then respond to that fear in a
really constructive way
as with the young man his story was told
at the beginning of this video
in this case the difference between
ignorance and having a well-informed
opinion
could be the difference between death
and life